I'm building a tiny hacker house on a trailer. It will be about 150 sq. ft.
total, and that includes the 50 sq. ft. or so required for the queen-size loft.
It will have a tiny kitchen, tiny bathroom, tiny living area, but a regular
sized bathtub.  The bathtub is important because it doubles as a laundry
washer.

<center> <img src="/img/tiny-hacker-house-rough-model.png" alt="tiny hacker
house rough model"> </center>

I've had 5 different addresses in 3 years of living in the Bay Area, always
seeking the most comfortable yet cost-effective living situation. Somewhere
along the way, I got sick of paying increasing rent for living where I wanted.
I got sick of scheduling my major vacations and life transitions in 3, 6, or
12-month increments. I also became disheartened by the cost of owning a home --
not just the price of the home, but the time and energy required shopping for
it, maintaining utilities, mortgages, the yard, building code, HOA code, and
property tax. It just seems so high maintenance.

There are times when I feel overwhelmed by concrete, people, the monotony and
predictability of the daily city routine. When this happens, I like to take
a mini sabbatical to reconnect myself to the humanity of a fresh experience.
Most of the time this means going solo camping or taking a mini road trip.
A well-designed tiny house is the perfect vehicle for this. No need to pack.

I look at the material things around me and wonder if I could design
a lifestyle that didn't place so much importance on owning those things. When
I moved to San Francisco, I owned only what could fit in a car. Without
a couch, TV, and cooking supplies, I went out most nights to eat and explore,
and making friends happened organically. When I invited those friends over for
dinner, I resisted buying a kitchen table. Instead, people sat in a circle on
floor pillows. I think it made for a much more intimate dining experience.
I sit in chairs enough anyway.

I work remotely as an independent developer. I get tired of going to coffee
shops and co-working spaces to work. They're neither collaborative nor
focus-friendly, but somewhere in between, where I can work alone and not feel
alone. But after a while, I realized this isn't the solution. I'd rather work
in either long stretches of pristine solitude, or in highly engaged sessions
face-to-face. For the former, what could be more ideal than an office at the
beach, in the forest, or on a snow-covered mountain?

So I'm building a tiny hacker house. The next post will detail the structural
design and living systems.








My <a href="#">last post</a> provided some of the basic philosophical reasoning
behind my journey to build a tiny hacker house. It also featured a rough model
of the house at a very early stage in its conception. Well, after a couple more
months of research and a dash of Burningman inspiration, I've completed what
I consider to be the beta version of the design.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-right.png" alt="Overview Right"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Enough hacker space to squeeze in 3 or 4 curious nomads.
</i> </div> </center>

### Design Goals

Although it's on a 16' trailer, I want my house to be practical enough to
comfortably shelter 4 adults for weekend ski trips, tiny dinner parties, and
the occasional road trip or two. I also want to be fairly independent of
grid-tied scenarios; I suspect I'll be dancing around from place to place as
I navigate the legal contours of living in a tiny house in greater San
Francisco.  As a result, my soft goal for the house is to support a decent
living without resupplies for 4 person-weeks. That means electricity,
showering, dishes, drinking water, food, and propane for 1 person for 4 weeks,
or 4 people for 1 week.

I believe one of the primary reasons folks get hassled for living full-time in
RVs is because they are, for the most part, unsightly. Airstreams are beautiful
feats of engineering, but even they don't blend in well as a full-time dwelling
in an urban or suburban environment. I was originally planning to use
a maintenance-free material for the exterior siding such as corrugated aluminum
or [Corten RustWall
panels](http://www.cortenroofing.com/rustwall-reg-panel_8_1160_30805.html), but
I've decided to stick with the standard cedar planks. The less my house stands
out, the easier it'll be to find permanent parking.

Since I make my living on my computer, I want to be able to work comfortably
anytime, anywhere. The electrical system will need to power a laptop, a few
lights, and internet equipment for up to 12 hours, in the case of a winter
all-nighter. It will also need to handle power spikes of a few hours at a time,
such as running toaster oven, lights, range fan, and A/C simultaneously.

I also want to be able to maintain a comfortable 68 - 78&#176;F whether I'm in
Austin for the summer or Colorado for the winter. Closed-cell spray foam
insulation seems to be the most practical solution here, if a bit pricey. Along
with rigid foam insulation, a radiant heat barrier, and the interior / exterior
siding, I'm looking at an insulating R-value in the mid 30's. An 8,000 BTU
window air conditioner should cool the 100 sq ft nicely.

For heating, I've seen a lot of folks go with [Dickinson
Marine](http://dickinsonmarine.com/propane.php)'s propane fireplace, but
I wanted something that provides more ambient heat as opposed to a single
point-source of toasty air. Because if your toes are cold, it doesn't matter
how warm the rest of you is -- you're still cold. So I'm planning to integrate
a closed-loop solar in-floor heating system.

I spent a couple days crunching numbers trying to size the system, but it's
difficult given the amount of thermal variables in a mobile tiny house. I plan
to use 4 solar heating panels on the roof, anti-freeze coolant,
variable-voltage DC pump, and PEX tubing snaked under the hardwood floor boards
to heat my home. I can adjust the amount of heat exchanged into the home by
dialing up or down the speed of the pump. Frigid nights will prove challenging,
however -- an insulated coolant storage tank may be necessary to collect the
day's heat. If all else fails, I can always light the oven to double as
a makeshift fireplace.

### Towing

Physics dictates that you'll need a truck or SUV to safely tow a tiny house at
highway speeds. Heavy duty trucks work best due to their weight, braking
system, and long wheelbase. Most wood-framed tiny houses seem to come in at
a dry weight of 4,000 - 7,000 lb, but mine will be substantially heavier at
a maximum 11,000 lb due to its beefier construction and off-grid goodies. That
significantly narrows my choices available for tow vehicles -- most SUVs are
limited to 8,000 lb and even full-size trucks won't cut it with a maximum
towing capacity of about 10,000 lb. Because of this, I chose a Chevy 2500 HD
with a maximum towing capacity of 14,500 lb. Its price, lengthy wheelbase, 7500
lb curb weight, and single rear wheel make for the best combination of features
given my budget.
 
<center> <img src="/img/overview.png" alt="Overview"> <div class="caption"> <i>
My tow vehicle is a 3/4 ton Chevy truck. Ironically, it's longer than my house.
</i> </div> </center>

The front axle of my tandem-axle trailer almost perfectly bisects the house
foundation, making it straightforward to estimate the weight distribution to
achieve a desired tongue weight of 10-15% total trailer weight. The heaviest
items will be located low and towards the front of the house, so I chose
a wedge shape for the frame to balance the batteries, water tanks, etc that
will sit close to the tongue. A tongue-supported storage shed and rear
hitch-mounted luggage tray will provide flexibility for fine-tuning the weight
distribution.

Knowing the estimated dry weight of my house, I can roughly calculate the
forces involved in an emergency maneuver such as coming to screeching stop.
According to
[MotorTrend](http://www.trucktrend.com/roadtests/pickup/163_1402_2015_chevrolet_silverado_2500_hd_ltz_4x4_first_test/?__federated=1),
my truck has a 60 to 0 mph stopping distance of 134 ft. That translates to
about 1 G-force, and will be less when fully loaded and towing. So the total
lateral shear force acting between the house and the trailer could be up to
10,000 lbs, or 5 tons. I'll probably want to use high-grade bolts to attach the
subfloor and reinforce the corners of the frame with angle iron.

### Framing

If I'm going to do all the work to build a tiny house, I want the full
experience of architecting it too. I didn't realize, however, how much tedious
work is involved just to get an accurate model finished. I've been researching
and working on it for the past 4 months part-time, and just now getting to the
point where I feel comfortable ordering materials. If you haven't noticed
already, I'm using the fantastic and free [Sketchup
Make](http://www.sketchup.com/products/sketchup-make) to draw these up.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-frame.png" alt="Overview Frame"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Measure twice, cut once. Accurately precut frame members
will save me time.  </i> </div> </center>

I've decided to go with 12-gauge steel studs fastened with pan head screws and
welded together at the joints. I've also chosen the more rust-resistant G90
galvanization in case I decide to live in humid or coastal climates. That puts
the total weight of the frame at around 3000 lbs. It's heavy, but without
a solid frame, I'm worried the rest of the house could literally fall apart
after a few years of highway jostle. And, I can always peel back and replace
siding and sheathing but replacing a frame stud after it's been welded and
sealed in with spray foam would be a nightmare.

Local drywall supply stores usually have access to light gauge metal studs in
various sizes and types from the manufacturer, and can have them ready for you
in a few business days' notice. Most will even precut them for free if you give
them the desired lengths. Ideally, you could send them a list of the exact
members you need and simply assemble them like Legos, no cutting necessary.

I've reinforced points where the frame needs to remain perfectly aligned or
where I anticipate flex. This will keep the door hinging smoothly, and
hopefully prevent any gaps or creaks from developing in the siding and floor
boards.

### Layout

The kitchen consumes the whole forward bit of the trailer, and features 18"
deep counter tops. I like to cook, and I didn't want my transition to a tiny
life to undermine that. The sink is 18" x 16" x 8" inches deep -- large enough
to hold water for mopping the floors and washing large kitchenware. I've yet to
find a decent propane-powered stove / oven however. Most seem to be built for
either restaurants or camping. This [Camp Chef outdoor
oven](http://amzn.com/B0013LLSZG) comes close, but it's lacking a broil option
and automatic thermostat.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-top.png" alt="Overview Top"> <div
class="caption"> <i> From left to right: kitchen, living room, bathroom. Not
pictured: loft.  </i> </div> </center>

The living room / office / dining room is the most configurable area of the
house. The large table and futon fold against the wall to provide a large, open
area for a yoga session or slumber party. The energy-efficient chest-style
refrigerator, located to the right of the futon, provides extra lounging space.
The [Seiki 39" TV
/ Monitor](http://www.seiki.com/products/tv/SE39UY04-detail.php) is mounted on
an extending arm, functioning as a TV when against the wall and a computer
monitor when extended towards the futon.

Most tiny houses sacrifice bathroom space for extra living and cooking space.
While that seems to make sense at first, when you consider that showering,
shaving, dressing, and using the toilet are activities that are best performed
in the comfort of <i>your own</i> private space, I realized I wanted
a generously-sized bathroom. I can use the extra room as a clothes closet, and
do laundry in the shower pan.

That just about summarizes the design of the tiny hacker house. The next post
will detail the electrical system!










(If you missed the last post highlighting the major design choices for the tiny
hacker house, this one may be a little out of context. You should probably [go
read](#) it now.)

When I first contemplated building a tiny house, the electricity system was the
first thing I researched. Maybe that's because it's what I'm most comfortable
with as an electrical / computer engineer, or perhaps it's because that's what
enables the rest of the house to come alive. Since I wasn't planning to be
grid-tied, I had to depend on my electrical system to provide the comforts for
everyday life. If I wanted to rely on my home to support a decent living, it
needed to be fault-tolerant and straightforward to manage.

After much research, I've chosen to go with a solar system and
propane-converted Honda generator for backup. The panels will lie flat on my
slanted roof and I'll park the house facing south whenever possible to maximum
sunlight absorption. I toyed with the idea of building a collapsible windmill
like [this one](http://windpax.com) for backup power, but it would be need to
be huge, durable, and powerful -- likely a too expensive and time-consuming job
for a tiny house. I'll just stick to solar and propane. At least until my
nuclear reactor arrives in the mail.

<center> <img src="/img/power-panels.png" alt="Power Solar Panels"> <div
class="caption"> <i> You could say I'm a bit power hungry.  </i> </div>
</center>

Tiny houses are already space-confined; I didn't want to feel
electrically-confined as well. At the very minimum, I knew I needed to power
A/C, a refrigerator, lights, internet equipment, and a computer simultaneously.
At the peak, however, that includes a few more things -- pressurizing water,
brewing coffee, and using a hair dryer perhaps. I wanted to be able to support
a realistic load without tripping the breaker. So I came up with the following
table:

Device | Max power draw (W) -|- Laptop | 85 Hairdryer | 1000 Coffee machine
| 800 TV | 100 Air conditioner | 800 Refrigerator | 65 Wireless router | 10
Lights (4) | 60 Water pressurizer pump | 90 |= Total | 3010

Knowing that I'd need up to 3010 W of power at any one time, I could size my
inverter. If you're not familiar with electrical systems, the inverter is the
device that takes power from a 12 V DC source like a car battery and converts
it to the 120 V or 240 V AC standards used in homes around the world. They're
never 100% efficient, so a little power is lost in the form of heat during the
conversion process. They also don't like being run at maximum capacity for
extended periods of time, so it's good to leave a buffer to account for
unexpected power draw. Because of this (and other reasons noted below),
I decided to go with Outback's [FlexPower
One](http://www.outbackpower.com/outback-products/integrated-systems/item/flexpower-one?category_id=441)
utilizing a 3600 W inverter.

To continue sizing the rest of the solar system, I needed to calculate my
average kWh used per day. A kWh, or kilowatt-hour, of electricity is simply the
amount of kilowatts used in one hour. To calculate this I determine the number
of hours I expect to use each device in a given day, multiply by its power draw
from the table above, and sum the result:

Device | Usage per Day (h) | Power usage (Wh) -|-|- Laptop | 4 | 340 TV
| 2 | 200 Air conditioner | 4 | 3200 Refrigerator | 8 | 520 Wireless router
| 24 | 240 Lights (4) | 6 | 360 Water pressurizer pump | 2 | 180 ||= |Total
| 5040 Watt-hours

5040 Wh or about 5 kWh of power used in a typical day. To account for heat loss
inefficiencies in the system I multiplied this number by 1.5, ending up with
7.5 kWh. This means the battery bank will need to supply 7.5 kWh per day if
fully drained, but since it's damaging to discharge them more than 50%, we need
to multiply this number by 2. So 15 kWh of electricity is needed.

To find the number of deep-cycle batteries I'll need, I divide 15 kWh by the
voltage of my battery bank, 48 V. This gives me the required Ampere-hour (Ah)
rating of the bank.  [These](http://www.amzn.com/B00DDZ2H6E) heavy duty deep
cycle batteries offer 1240 Ah at 12 V, or 310 Ah at 48 V. This comes pretty
close to the 312.5 Ah required, and considering I'll have a 3000 W generator
backup, should be adequate for the tiny hacker house. For a better how-to on
sizing a solar battery bank, check
[this](http://www.instructables.com/id/How-to-Size-Your-Off-Grid-Solar-Batteries-1/)
Instructables DIY.

<center> <img src="/img/power-generator.png" alt="Honda Generator"> <div
class="caption"> <i> A 3000 W propane-fueled generator sits on a hitch-mounted
luggage rack on the back of the trailer.  </i> </div> </center>

Finally, I need to be fairly confident the solar panel array can provide enough
juice to charge the battery banks to 100% on a clear, sunny day. This will vary
wildly depending on the time of year, where I'm parked, the weather, angle of
the panel, and efficiency of the panel. For example, using
[this](http://www.sunsoglobal.com/calculator.html) panel sizing calculator,
Phoenix, AZ receives about 5.75 sun-hours in the winter, while Seattle, WA only
musters 1.6. This means your solar panel array would need to be about 3.5 times
larger if living in Seattle than Phoenix.

For the tiny hacker house, the majority of power is used by the A/C, so in the
winter months my power needs will be reduced to about 1.8 kWh -- less than half
required in the summer months.  Heating will be provided by in-floor solar
heating with a propane stove as backup, so minimal electricity requirements
there. I should mention that insulation plays a huge role in the power
requirements to heat and cool the home. Closed-cell spray foam insulation seems
to be the best available, which I'll cover in a later article.

<center> <img src="/img/power-panels2.png" alt="Solar panels"> <div
class="caption"> <i> At 21.3" x 47", <a
href="http://amzn.com/B009Z6CW7O">these</a> Renogy 100 W panels fit perfectly
on the roof.  </i> </div> </center>

The tiny hacker house roof has room for about 800 W of panels. Taking
everything into consideration, in the worst case scenario, I'd be able to
produce 0.8 kW * 1.6 h = 1.28 kWh / day on average during the winter in
Seattle. At an estimated usage of 1.8 kWh / day with no A/C, that means my 3000
W generator will need to run at full load for (1.8 - 1.28) / 3 = 0.1733 hours,
or about 10.4 minutes per day to make up the difference the solar panels can't
provide. I'm ok with that.

As you can tell, designing and managing an off-grid electrical system is pretty
complicated. That's why I chose to go with an integrated power management
system like the FlexPower One. It provides an inverter, MPPT charge controller,
logging device, and will even remote-start my generator when the battery bank
falls below a supplied charge threshold. With 100 lb of propane, I could run
the generator at full load for up to 40 hours (calculated from
[here](http://www.yamaha-propane-natural-gas-generators.com/fuel_consumption.htm)).
Plenty of power to live comfortably without worry!

That sums up the electrical system -- hope you made it all the way through. If
you have any questions please leave a comment below or <a
href="mailto:&#099;&#111;&#110;&#116;&#097;&#099;&#116;&#064;&#109;&#111;&#100;&#101;&#114;&#110;&#098;&#101;&#100;&#111;&#117;&#046;&#105;&#110;">shoot
me an email.</a> In the next post we'll dip into some smelly subjects as we
take a splash in the bathroom. :-)












As mentioned in a [previous article](#), my bathroom won't be just a place to
shower & shave -- it'll function as a walk-in closet as well.  If you're in the
house with others, it's also the only place where you can lock a door and
reasonably expect some privacy, so I wanted to keep that in mind for future
living arrangements where I may be sharing the house. Because of this, the
bathroom will occupy nearly 1/3 of the lower level space -- approximately 29
sq. ft. of the 103 sq. ft. available.

<center> <img src="/img/overview-bathroom.png" alt="Bathroom"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Large bathroom for a tiny house.  </i> </div> </center>

### Toilet

Since I plan to be off-grid or on the road often with my house, I knew
a standard plumbed-in toilet wouldn't be ideal. I'd have to accommodate a black
water tank underneath the house and deal with finding a spot to empty it every
couple weeks. The next best option seems to be an [incinerating
toilet](http://ssl3.sea.tierpoint.com/incinolet/), but they're pricey and
consume 450 Wh of electricity each use!

I certainly don't want any power problems to prevent pooing, so I'm sticking
with a simple composting toilet for the initial build. What's a composting
toilet, you ask? It's essentially a bucket enclosed in a comfy wooden
toilet-like enclosure. You sprinkle in peat moss or sawdust after each use to
absorb the smell and moisture, and after it's full, you can safely dump the
waste into a compost pile. It seems a bit unsanitary at first, but it's much
more eco-friendly -- [toilets consume the
most](http://www.epa.gov/watersense/pubs/indoor.html) water in a typical home.
Plus, in more permanent living situations, the abundance of fresh compost will
come in handy for my garden.

<center> <img src="/img/lovable-loo.jpg" alt="Lovable Loo"> <div
class="caption"> <i> The <a
href="http://humanurehandbook.com/store/LOVEABLE-LOO-Eco-Toilet.html">Lovable
Loo</a>: a popular composting toilet.  </i> </div> </center>

Everything I know about composting toilets is from the [Humanure
Handbook](http://humanurehandbook.com). Definitely worth a read if you're
interested in off-grid or eco-friendly toilets.

### Shower

Whatever the issue in life, long, hot showers always seem to clear the mind to
uncover a solution. I [had originally planned](#) to install a lavish
freestanding tub, but I've since given up on that plan. A 16' trailer is just
too small for that kind of luxury and I can wash clothes in a shower just as
easily. I didn't want to skimp too much on bathing facilities though, so
I managed to come up with something that's small yet comfy:

<center> <img src="/img/overview-shower.jpg" alt="Shower Enclosure"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Dreamline chrome and tempered glass tiny corner shower
enclosure.  </i> </div> </center>

At just 33"x33", Dreamline makes a beautiful, tiny [shower
kit](http://www.bathauthority.com/shower-enclosure-Prime.html) that fits my
bathroom perfectly. The height of the enclosure is *just right* to create
a floor-to-ceiling seal with my 6' 6" bathroom ceiling, so instead of
a freestanding tub I now have myself a tiny steam room. Success. With
a low-profile rain showerhead to complete the package I'll be basking in
dihydrogen monoxide bliss wherever I go.

### Sink

There are plenty of tiny sinks on the market. Width and height aren't really an
issue in my case, but I'll need plenty of room to move around, change clothes,
etc so I'm keen on finding something low-profile and wall mounted.
[This](http://amzn.com/B00B24HVIM) ALFI AB108 is the sexiest one I've found but
it's pricey especially once you include the optional towel bar. I'll have
enough road issues to deal with -- better not add highway robbery to the list.
The sink search is still on.

### Closet

One thing's for sure: I need to get rid of some clothes before I move into my
tiny house. The hanger rack is only 16" long -- enough room for about 15
clothes hangers. After accounting for a jacket, hoodie, and winter coat, that's
only enough room for about a week's worth of pants and collared shirts.
Bathroom shelves provide a little more storage though, allowing me to avoid
doing laundry for up to two weeks.

I never considered myself to be a packrat, but now that I'm considering
*actually* moving into a tiny house, declaring a spot for *every* little thing
I own, it really dawns on me how little consideration I give to acquiring new
material comforts. 








With only 103 sq. ft. to work with, floor space *has* to be optimized. One big
difference I notice between most RVs and tiny houses is the latter usually
takes advantage of a bit higher ceilings to make room for a bedroom loft. It's
a great way to make use of the 13' 6" allowable road height for trailers
without sacrificing valuable floor space for a permanent bed.

<center> <img src="/img/loft-head-height.png" alt="Loft Head Height"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Plenty of room for sitting up to read a book.  </i> </div>
</center>

Since I'll be either sleeping or reading 99% of the time I'm in bed, I don't
need much headroom. Lucky for me, the wedge shape of my trailer frame allows
for three and a half feet of vertical room at the head of the mattress. Space
is a bit more cramped at the foot of the loft at just over 2 feet to the
ceiling, so I've recessed the loft entrance 28" back to a point where the
clearance is close to 3 feet.

<center> <img src="/img/loft-ladder-height.png" alt="Loft Ladder Height"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Recessing part of the loft floor adds a much needed 6" of
head clearance when climbing up the ladder.  </i> </div> </center>

Since the loft is the most confined space in the house, I knew it would need
lots of natural lighting. That's why there's a huge 6' x 3' casement window at
the rear, and two 2' x 2' casement windows on the sides. Skylights seem to be
all the rage in tiny homes, and I've added a large 56" VELUX directly above the
mattress for stargazing on cool, clear nights.  And it opens wide enough to
reach the solar panels for occasional cleaning, so that'll keep me from having
to climb onto the roof.

I'm still trying to figure out the ladder situation. It
[seems](http://tinyhousetalk.com/tiny-house-furniture-1-chair-ladder/) to be
a [common](http://tinyhouselistings.com/tiny-house-uk-unique-loft-ladder/)
point of
[interest](http://tinyhousebuild.com/ridiculously-easy-loft-ladder-for-tiny-houses/)
for most tiny houses. The shelving staircase used in Rocky Mountain Tiny
Houses' [Boulder](http://rockymountaintinyhouses.com/plans/boulder/) plan is
attractive and clever. But I want to be careful about adding permanent stairs;
if I don't use the storage I'll be tempted to tear it down and find a more
efficient way to climb into the loft. Right now the plan is to reinforce the
shelving near the TV to double as a ladder, or build a thin metal ladder that
attaches to the loft edge and tucks away into the pocket door nook when not in
use. We'll see.








Hi folks. It's been a while since the last update, but for good reason! I've
been busy building. More on that in another post. But first, I'd like to
discuss plumbing.

(A little aside: Unless you're willing to spend hours and hours designing
a system from scratch (and likely still get it wrong), please just hire
a professional. I'm only offering here the resources I've found helpful in the
hopes it'll be helpful for other DIY'ers. I certainly wish I had more examples
available to study as I dove into this adventure.)

Since the tiny hacker house will be heated via a closed-loop in-floor radiant
heat system, the plumbing is a bit more complicated than your typical tiny
house. One heater will need to provide hot water for both the fixtures and home
heating, so a "smarter" system is required to ensure everything flows properly
and stays hot. Unfortunately, that means a bit of back-of-the-napkin
calculations are in order.

<h3>Water heater sizing for mortals</h3>

The first order of business is figuring out a "worst case" scenario for hot
water usage. This will serve as the maximum heat load for the system, measured
in BTUs / hr. If you have a stationary home with traditional heating, this is
pretty easy -- just throw in one or more electric tank heaters (depending on
the size of your family) and you're done. With mobile homes and radiant
heating, though, it requires answering some questions first. Tank or Tankless?
Planning ski trips? Having house guests? Using an automatic dish washer?
Everyone's scenarios are different.

__My "worst case" scenario is taking a 110&deg;F shower in 0&deg;F weather
while keeping the house at a comfortable 75&deg;F.__

To calculate the required BTUs per hour for this load, I simply need to know
4 things: the starting temperature of the water I want to heat for my shower,
the flow rate of the shower head, the area of my walls, floors, and ceilings,
and the insulation R-value for each.

If I assume the temperature of the water for my shower comes from the tank at
32&deg;F (hopefully not frozen!), we can estimate the BTU/hr required to heat
the water to 110&deg; through a 2.2 GPM shower head using the calculation:

_BTU/hr = 500 * water flow rate * (temperature inside - temperature outside)_

_BTU/hr = 500 * 2.2 * (110 - 32)_

_BTU/hr = 85,800_

Now, to estimate the BTU/hr required to heat the home, I can use the following
equation:

_BTU/hr = (wall surface area / R-value) * temperature difference_

Shown below is a table summarizing the R-value and area of my walls and
windows. I'm assuming a very conservative R-value of 20 for all my walls and
1 for windows. With more efficient windows, thermal barriers, and 3" of spray
foam insulation, it should be much higher in practice.

| Location | Area (sq) | R-value | A / R | |- |N Wall| 75 | 20|3.75| |S Wall|
55 | 20|2.75| |E Wall| 130| 20|6.5| |W Wall| 130| 20|6.5| |Ceiling| 116|
20|5.8| |Floor|106|20|5.3| |Windows|70|1|70| | | | | | |Total| | | 101.1 |

Notice the majority of heat loss occurs through the windows due to their
relatively low R-value. Increasing the efficiency of the windows to R-2 or even
R-5 can help dramatically. But in this worst-case scenario, the required BTUs
/ hr to heat the house is:

BTU/hr = 101.1 * 75 = 7,582

So the total BTU/hr needed for my "worst case" scenario noted above is

85,800 + 7,582 = 93,382 BTU/hr

After a bit of searching around, I decided to go with the [Takagi
T-KJr2](http://www.takagi.com/products/tankless-water-heaters/t-kjr2-in-p).
Its 140,000 BTU capacity and 82% efficiency means it'll be able to supply up to
114,800 BTUs of heat -- more than enough for my maximum heat load scenario.

<h3>Let's get pumped</h3>

After the water heater's been decided, we need to find a circulation pump to
move the water through the radiant floor loop, heat exchanger, and water heater
at the proper flow and pressure. With a pump too small, the efficiency of the
plate heat exchanger suffers -- I may not be able to reach the 110&deg;F design
temperature for the domestic hot water. With a pump too large, the efficiency
of the system suffers -- pressure drops exponentially with higher and higher
flows.

<center> <img src="/img/plumbing/takagi_curve.png" alt="tiny hacker house
plumbing taco bumblebee curve"> <div class="caption"> <i>Pressure drop and
temperature rise charts for a given flow for the Takagi T-KJr2 water
heater.</i> </div> </center>

At this point, a professional plumber would calculate the required flow for
maximum heat transfer for my heat exchanger in my worst case scenario, the
pressure drop through the radiant floor loop, and accurately size a high
pressure, low flow pump based on this information.

We're not going to do that.

Instead, I've opted to go with the Taco Bumblebee -- a variable speed, low
power programmable pump. At just under $200, it's in the ballpark of most
conventional circulation pumps, and uses as little as 9 W at the lowest speed
setting. Pretty efficient if you ask me.

Except the issue with this pump (or rather, my system) is that I have
a relatively high pressure drop compared to most conventional radiant floor
systems. This is because of my choice of 1/2" PEX pipe, which I chose because
of its 5/8" outside diameter -- my subfloor plywood in which I'm laying the
radiant piping is only 1 1/8" thick. With 3/4" PEX I need a 7/8" groove in the
subfloor, meaning for long length-wise runs of my floor, I'd have only 1/4" of
subfloor plywood supporting the load above. If it cracks or breaks, the
hardwood floor above would likely crack soon after (it's running in the same
length-wise orientation as the heating loops), and I'd have to rip up the whole
floor down to the trailer frame to fix everything. In a conventional home, I'd
have plenty of space to use larger pipes. But with a tiny house, there are
trade-offs I have to make.

Here's a table of my estimated combined max pressure drop vs flow in the
radiant loop, calculated from the Takagi chart above and the pressure drop
tables from the [residential pex design
guide](http://www.huduser.org/portal/publications/pex_design_guide.pdf) (PDF):

| Flow (GPM) | Pressure Drop (ft. of head) | |- |1.0|6| |1.5|11| |2.0|18|
|2.5|29| |3.0|40| |3.5|52| |4.0|65| |4.5|81| |5.0|96| |6.0|140|

Experienced plumbers and hydro engineers may look at this table and say, "get
a cheap diaphragm pump, dummy! High pressure, low flow!". But the Bumblebee is
_programmable_, that's like marketing kryptonite for software engineers such as
myself. It has 3 modes of operation! 2 temperature sensors! Bring on the
Arduino shield baby!

<center> <img src="/img/plumbing/taco_curve.png" alt="tiny hacker house
plumbing taco bumblebee curve"> </center>

The good news is the Bumblebee will work for my system, albeit at a maximum
flow of 1.5 - 2 GPM. But this reduces my electricity usage anyway, and provides
the maximum heat rise from my water heater. The only issue now is the heat
exchanger loses its efficiency at that low flow.

Theoretically, roughly the same amount of heat is applied to a fluid through
a heat exchanger regardless of flow, but in reality, faster flows generate more
turbulence across the plates, covering more surface area and transferring more
heat.

My solution to this final puzzle is to buy the largest heat exchanger feasible
-- a 1,000,000 BTU/hr copper-brazed plate exchanger (sometimes the brute force
approach is best). The difference between the small and large ones is a matter
of a few hundred dollars and a few inches, but the heating capacity gains are
ten-fold. It's an upfront cost that will save on both electricity and propane
costs for the life of the house.

<h3>Tap supply</h3>

To supply cold / hot water to the fixtures in the house, there are two possible
scenarios to take into account.

If the tap water's already coming from a pressurized source such as a garden
hose, city water, or RV hookup, you simply need to filter the water before
running to your heat exchanger and taps. It's also recommended to install
a water pressure regulator in case you happen upon any extreme pressures in
your travels.

If, however, it's coming from the tank, you need to pressurize it, feed it to
a buffer / accumulator tank (to prevent rapid pump cycling and surges) then
feed it to the rest of your tap lines.

Many choices for parts abound for scenario 2, but what's most important is the
GPM rating of the pressure pump and its power consumption. I've selected one
rated for 3.0 GPM at 90 W, but they come in all sizes.

<h3>Mixing electricity and water</h3>

Finally, we need to add a bit of smarts so that everything is automatic.

The state of the plumbing system can represented by 2 "bits" of information:
fixture (shower) on / off and radiant floor on / off. So there are four
possible states the system can be in: both off, both on, fixture on, or radiant
on.

Using an HVAC thermostat and flow switch, we can control the system with
a simple "truth table":

| Thermostat requesting heat? | Hot tap flow? | Pump state | Radiant zone valve
| |- |No|No|Off|Bypass| |Yes|No|On|Floor loop| |Yes|Yes|On|Floor loop|
|No|Yes|On|Bypass|

So if I'm showering and it's cold outside, the pump is on and the thermostat
switches the zone valve to the floor loop. If I'm showering in the summer, the
pump is on but the zone valve is set to bypass the floor loop so as not to heat
up the house. The water heater fires up automatically when it senses flow above
0.5 GPM, so the pump triggers the water heater in this setup.

Add in a couple relays to provide the switching and I should be good to go.

<h3>Putting it all together</h3>

I now humbly present to you, the schematic:

<center> <img src="/img/plumbing/schematic.png" alt="tiny hacker house plumbing
schematic"> <div class="caption"> <i>Ok, so I like to color outside the lines
a little</i> </div> </center>

If any professional plumbers are reading this and feeling generous, please
offer your critique in the comments below!

_Update:_

The [reddit
discussion](http://www.reddit.com/r/TinyHouses/comments/2tdin6/finally_finished_my_tiny_house_radiant_floor/)
concerning this design has prompted me to reconsider going with a dual zone
heater, known as a "combi" boiler. The problem is, they're very pricey -- this
<a
href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0082LSCKO/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B0082LSCKO&linkCode=as2&tag=modebedo-20&linkId=265ZGRACS6NKR7PD">Rinnai
E110CP</a><img
src="http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=modebedo-20&l=as2&o=1&a=B0082LSCKO"
width="1" height="1" border="0" alt="" style="border:none !important;
margin:0px !important;" /> is about 2x the cost of the setup shown here for
a similar BTU rating. It would be nice to save a bit of space and plumbing
complexity, but if the pump, heat exchanger, or zone valve fail I'm stuck with
OEM replacements.








_Disclaimer: I'm not a certified electrician, just a stubborn DIY'er._

**tl;dr:** Scroll to the bottom for the [schematic](#schematic).

Electricity is one of the most important aspects of building a house. If you
get it wrong, your house can burn down. Or you'll constantly be flipping
breakers and frying devices. Definitely hire a professional electrician if you
just want a system that works and is safe. But if you're a stubborn
DIY'er-at-all-costs like me, read on.

Since the tiny hacker house is designed to operate off grid, the electrical
wiring closely resembles what you'd find in a typical RV. I have to say,
information on wiring an RV is extremely hard to come across on the web.  The
main hangup is accommodating for both 12V and 120V supplies. 120V wiring is
straightforward enough -- just follow your local building code's guidelines.
But throw in 12V appliances, a battery bank, inverter, "shore power" and you
have a little more thinking to do.

### Picking an Inverter

Needless to say, inverters are extremely important. The good ones seem to do it
all safely and with flying colors, and the really bad ones can hiss, crackle,
spark, and smoke if you even get close to their rated capacity. There are a few
key metrics you need to keep in mind when picking one. Here's what I learned:

##### Signal Quality There are two types of inverters: pure sine and modified
sine wave. The modified sine wave inverters "mimic" 120V AC with a step wave so
while fine for most devices, it can cause problems for sensitive devices like
fluorescent lights, battery chargers, and some medical equipment. Pure sine
wave inverters, however, generate an AC supply identical to what you'd receive
from the city power grid. Presumably, it makes more sense to go with a pure
sine model, but they can be nearly double the price for the same capacity.
Personally, I'm making the tradeoff for a pure sine model. I don't want any
surprises on the road.

##### Voltage Assuming you've already determined your [power](#) requirements
and settled on a battery bank configuration, you need to pick an inverter that
matches your bank voltage. Most inverters are designed for 12V, but if you need
more than 4000W or so they typically require 24V or even 48V DC sources
instead. A 24V or 48V system is fine, but then you'll need a step-down
converter to power any 12V appliances you may have (yes, "technically" you can
just tap your 48V battery bank at a 12V point to avoid the converter, but this
will drain the bank unevenly and could reduce its lifetime). If you're using
solar as well, this will have to match your solar MPPT charger's output. Also,
you should pick an inverter with about 120% of the power capacity you plan to
use in an ongoing basis. Most aren't designed to run at 100% capacity for long
periods of time.

##### Charging / Pass-through Capability If you plan to ever hook up to a city
power grid or shore power at an RV park (or even some generators), a charging
inverter may suit you better. These smart devices are essentially an inverter
with an AC input to automatically charge your batteries when you connect to an
AC source. The switching happens on the fly -- when you disconnect (or the
generator runs out of gas), the inverter will automatically and instantly
switch from charging mode to inverting mode with no loss of power to your house
in between. Some of the beefier inverter/chargers can even pass split-phase
240V AC input through to power your devices. So if your tinyhouse uses a 50A
shore power inlet, you'll be able to use both 120V hot legs of the supply
instead of just one, basically doubling your available power. More on that
later.

According to everything I've read so far, the [Magnum
Energy](http://magnumenergy.com) ones are some of the best. They have [a 48V
4000W+ inverter](http://magnumenergy.com/ms-pae-series-invertercharger/) that
supplies split-phase 240V so it could power electric ranges, large ACs, and
electric dryers! We won't be needing any of that for the tiny hacker house, but
it is nice to know I am future-proofed in case my electrical needs grow. 

### 30A or 50A Shore Power: What's the Difference?

When you pull up to your spot at an RV park or campground, you'll typically see
an electrical panel like this:

<center> <img src="/img/rv-power-pedestal.jpg" alt="RV Power Pedestal"> <div
class="caption"> <i> From left to right: 50A outlet, 30A outlet, and two 20A
outlets all with corresponding breakers. Notice the double-pole breaker for the
50A outlet!  </i> </div> </center>

Called the power pedestal, these are pretty much the "main panel" for your
electrical system -- they're where the neutral is bonded to ground. _Note: that
means you **DO NOT** bond your neutral to ground in your tinyhouse's electrical
panel!_

As you may know, 120V systems in the US utilize three wires: hot, neutral, and
ground. Power is applied to your devices via the difference in potential
between the hot and neutral wires. The ground is just a safety measure -- if
the hot leg accidentally shorts to the casing of the device it's powering,
electricity will safely short to ground, tripping the associated breaker
instead of shorting through you if you happen to touch the afflicted device
(think: old rusty washing machine). This is why old homes and some devices are
in "two-prong" configuration -- the ground can sometimes be omitted.

Now, you may notice in that picture the 50A outlet on the left utilizes _four_
wires. Three of them are the same as any ordinary outlet, but the fourth is
actually another hot wire. This means there are _two_ hots, one neutral (shared
between the hots), and one ground. Without getting too technical, this is to
provide 240V AC to certain high-power devices. The additional hot is 120V as
well, but shifted 180&deg; out of phase with the other one, so the average
potential between them sums to 240V. Pretty neat huh?

The corresponding breaker (the two handles on the left) is a double-pole
breaker. That simply means it is actually two 50A breakers with a mechanism in
place such that if one breaker trips, it forces the other 50A one to trip as
well. So with a standard four-wire 50A outlet we actually get 50A + 50A
= _100A_ at 120V, or 12,000W power. That's over **three** times what the 30A
outlet can provide and **five** times what a standard 20A outlet can provide.

So what does this mean for a tinyhouse? If you think you'll ever need more
power than what the three-wire 30A outlet can provide (namely 3,600W), you need
to make sure to use a 50A inlet and wire your house accordingly. That means
picking an inverter that can pass through split-phase AC input, and having at
least two separate 50A electrical circuits for your tiny house: one for each
hot leg of the 50A power.

### Schematic <a name="schematic"></a>

Finally, here is what all that adds up to:

<center> <img src="/img/wiring-schematic.png" alt="Tiny Hacker House Wiring
Schematic"> <div class="caption"> <i> NOTE: The service inlet plug should
actually be male, not female.      </i> </div> </center>

In my design, I actually have three panels in order to electrically isolate the
inverter without having to rewire anything. Hence the "main panel" and transfer
panel. You could just as easily omit these and feed directly into the inverter
and then into your subpanel.

The subpanel consists of four 120V circuits: two 20V runs and two 15V runs. I'd
have to upgrade the subpanel to make room for a double-pole breaker if I wanted
to feasibly run a 240V appliance on this system.

Also note the current ratings written on the panels in the diagram are a bit
misleading. Those are the total current ratings for each leg of 120V, so divide
by two in the context of split-phase 240V.

Good luck and email me or comment with any questions!









This is the first build post. I actually started building in late November, but
wanted to make some sustained progress before sharing what I've learned.
I knew I wanted to use metal stud framing, but how much more difficult could
this be than traditional stick framing?

<center> <img src="/img/framing/back wall up.jpg" alt="Back wall up"> </center>

Well, it took 2 months and a few false starts to get the steel frame together
and finalized.

My first design used 25-gauge metal studs found in any Home Depot. It didn't
take into account any sort of industry-standard structural building techniques,
but it was fairly easy to assemble:

<center> <img src="/img/framing/initial attempt.jpg" alt="Initial framing
attempt"> <div class="caption"> <i> This flimsy subfloor wouldn't last through
a single screeching stop.  </i> </div> </center>

The subfloor could be strapped to the trailer frame with wood hurricane straps!
I thought I was really clever for coming up with this "foundation":

<center> <img src="/img/framing/initial foundation.jpg" alt="Initial foundation
attempt"> <div class="caption"> <i> 18-gauge galvanized steel straps holding
down the subfloor and eventually 12,000 lbs of house. Haha.  </i> </div>
</center>

Then I found out about the [Prescriptive Method for Residential Cold-Formed
Steel Framing]({{site.baseurl}}/files/steel_framing_guide.pdf). Apparently, if
you're framing anything with steel, this is the reference to rule them all.
After reading that, I realized I had to trash the subfloor I already built and
order some _real_ metal studs. This meant I needed the precise lengths of all
the tracks and studs I would need in advance. And so I came up with this:

<center> <img src="/img/framing/design.png" alt="Framing model"> <div
class="caption"> <i> 12" OC steel frame design. I decided in the end to go with
24" OC spacing.  </i> </div> </center>

Once my order of 12-gauge studs and tracks arrived, it was time to start
building! I decided to build my walls on the ground first, then raise them into
place. What could go wrong?

<center> <img src="/img/framing/build floor wall.jpg" alt="Build floor wall">
</center>

<center> <img src="/img/framing/backhoe lift.jpg" alt="Backhoe lift"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Seemed easy enough, right?  </i> </div> </center>



Well, it turns out steel bends and flexes pretty easily under its own weight.
Furthermore, the 12-gauge studs I was using required a lot of banging to get
them to slide into the tracks, and they kept popping out. When I finally
screwed them together, this tension added up. When I got the first three walls
up, I noticed things weren't quite right:

<center> <img src="/img/framing/wall warp.jpg" alt="wall warp"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Notice the whole frame skewing to the left.  </i> </div>
</center>

Sigh. I'd have to be more careful with the final wall -- making sure it was
nice and square before hoisting it into place.

<center> <img src="/img/framing/last wall accuracy.jpg" alt="last wall
accuracy"> <div class="caption"> <i> Off by a 1/2" over a 16' span. Not too
shabby.  </i> </div> </center>

That made a big difference. With the final wall built, I could prepare the
other three so the corners would line up. I goaded the frame back to its
planned shape using a series of ratchet straps:

<center> <img src="/img/framing/wall skew.jpg" alt="wall skew"> <div
class="caption"> <i> </i> </div> </center>

<center> <img src="/img/framing/four walls.jpg" alt="four walls"> <div
class="caption"> <i> All four walls up (for now).  </i> </div> </center>

I then lifted the last wall into place. But just before I was able to screw it
to the others, it came crashing down, nearly flattening me into a tiny human.

<center> <img src="/img/framing/wall fall.jpg" alt="wall fall"> <div
class="caption"> <i> 2 days of build time gone.  </i> </div> </center>

After getting the fourth wall back up, I decided to add some cross-structural
bracing and weld all the joints to provide much more rigidity.

<center> <img src="/img/framing/skew brace.jpg" alt="skew brace"> <div
class="caption"> <i> Preventing side-to-side shearing.  </i> </div> </center>
<center> <img src="/img/framing/lateral brace.jpg" alt="lateral brace"> <div
class="caption"> <i> And another steel plate welded diagonally across the
double-studded wall. That will eliminate any shearing during sudden
acceleration and deceleration maneuvers.  </i> </div> </center> <center> <img
src="/img/framing/corner detail.jpg" alt="corner detail"> <div class="caption">
<i> Commanding the power of Zeus to make my tiny house indestructable.  </i>
</div> </center>

Once the frame was done and welded, I still needed to punch 1/2" holes through
the studs to run the electrical wiring and plumbing. I also needed to drill
through the trailer flange to attach my foundation anchors. This took about
a week and 7 cobalt drill bits.

After all that hard work, was it worth using metal studs? Absolutely. Just
maybe not 12-gauge ones. 18-gauge would probably be more suitable and can still
be welded. On to electrical and plumbing!

Here are all the pics:

<ul class="thumbnails"> <li><a href="/img/framing/anchor detail.jpg"
data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/anchor detail.jpg"></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/framing/anchor.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/anchor.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/back wall
up.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/back wall
up.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/backhoe lift.jpg"
data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/backhoe lift.jpg" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/framing/build floor wall.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/build floor wall.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/framing/clip angle.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/clip angle.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/corner
detail.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/corner detail.jpg"
></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/design.png" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/design.png" ></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/first
wall.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/first wall.jpg"
></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/four walls.jpg"
data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/four walls.jpg" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/framing/initial attempt.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/initial attempt.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/framing/initial foundation.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/initial foundation.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/framing/last wall accuracy.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/last wall accuracy.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/framing/lateral brace.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/lateral brace.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/poor
man's scaffold.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/poor man's
scaffold.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/skew brace.jpg"
data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/skew brace.jpg" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/framing/temp brace.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
src="/img/framing/temp brace.jpg" ></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/wall
fall.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/wall fall.jpg"
></a></li> <li><a href="/img/framing/wall skew.jpg"
>data-lightbox="framing"><img src="/img/framing/wall skew.jpg" ></a></li>
><li><a href="/img/framing/wall warp.jpg" data-lightbox="framing"><img
>src="/img/framing/wall warp.jpg" ></a></li> </ul>







As soon as the [steel framing](#) was finished, it was time to punch 1/2" holes
through the studs I needed to route plumbing and electrical cabling through.

The tiny hacker house has a total of 8 outlets situated mostly along the left
side of the house, and a shower, kitchen sink, bathroom sink, and toilet that
need water lines. Oh and 10 light receptacles and 4 switch boxes that need
electricity as well.


<!-- whole trailer pic --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/overview.jpg"
alt="Overview"> <div class="caption"> <i>It's alive!</i> </div> </center>

This meant I needed to punch over 50 1/2" holes through 12-gauge steel... not
a simple task. It's these kinds of one-off difficulties that make working with
steel studs much more tricky than wood.

<!-- stud punch pic --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/stud punch.jpg"
alt="Stud punch"> <div class="caption"> <i>Requires a pilot hole to make the
punch... that's what I came to you for!</i> </div> </center>

I ended up buying a 6-ton hydraulic steel stud punch tool to make the holes.
Ironically, however, it needs a 3/8" hole already drilled in the stud in order
to function.  And it doesn't work through double studs. For that I used
a bi-metal hole saw.  It took a whole week to place fixtures, measure, and cut
all the holes.

<!-- electrical box pic --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/fridge.jpg"
alt="fridge outlet"> <div class="caption"> <i>Dedicated fridge outlet</i>
</div> </center>


Plastic bushings are required in metal studs so the sharp edges don't cut the
water lines or short your electricity to the frame, turning your tiny house
into a giant electrocution device.

<!-- tv outlet pic --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/first outlet.jpg"
alt="TV outlet"> <div class="caption"> <i>TV outlet</i> </div> </center>

After everything was cut, painted with galvanizing spray, and bushings
inserted, I could route the piping and cabling. I found it easier to first
attach the electrical boxes to a 6" 2x4 backing block and then screw the whole
piece into the stud.

<!-- shower rough in --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/shower valve
detail.jpg" alt="Shower valve detail"> <div class="caption"> <i>Shower rough
in</i> </div> </center>

For the plumbing I used PEX. It seems to be all the rage these days. It's
pretty simple to work with -- if you have a good crimper and do it carefully,
you shouldn't have any leaks for years to come.

<!-- gauge --> <center> <img src="/img/build-plumbing/hose pressure.jpg"
alt="Hose pressure"> <div class="caption"> <i>Hose pressure is zero because the
shower valve prevents backflow.</i> </div> </center>

After I finished the plumbing rough-in, I plugged all the fixtures and
pressure-tested it first with air to 100 PSI, then overnight with a garden hose
attached. I guess this first-timer got lucky -- no leaks!

Next I'll be putting up the sheathing and making final preparations for the
insulation installation!

Here are all the pics for your viewing pleasure:

<!-- all pics --> <ul class="thumbnails"> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/sink
and toilet.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/sink and toilet.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/corner plumbing.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/corner
plumbing.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/first outlet.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/first
outlet.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/corner.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/corner.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/office.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/office.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/bent shower valve.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/bent shower
valve.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/overview.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/overview.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/inlet.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/inlet.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/fridge.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/fridge.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/entrypoint.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/entrypoint.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/ceiling lights.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/ceiling
lights.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/bathroom.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/bathroom.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/shower.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/shower.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/tv outlet.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/tv outlet.jpg"></a></li> <li><a
href="/img/build-plumbing/bathroom switch.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/bathroom
switch.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/loft switch.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/loft
switch.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/hose pressure.jpg"
data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/hose
pressure.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/shower valve
detail.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img src="/img/build-plumbing/shower
valve detail.jpg"></a></li> <li><a href="/img/build-plumbing/kitchen
switch.jpg" data-lightbox="build-plumbing"><img
src="/img/build-plumbing/kitchen switch.jpg"></a></li> </ul>











As soon as the [electrical wiring and plumbing](#) was finished, it was time to
add the exterior sheathing. Sheathing is simply a 4'x8' piece of treated
plywood screwed into the frame every 12" or so. It adds structural support to
the frame to prevent shearing, and also provides a surface to attach the
exterior siding.

In this case, since I'm using metal studs, it's critical to use a layer of
rigid foam board between the frame and exterior sheathing to provide a thermal
barrier. Otherwise, the insulating R-value of my wall could be [reduced by
half](http://web.ornl.gov/sci/roofs+walls/research/detailed_papers/steel_frame/index.html)!
After the foam board and sheathing is applied, the wall cavity could be sprayed
with a soy-based closed-cell expanding foam.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/dad.jpg" alt="Dad sheathing"> <div
class="caption"> <i> The finished sheathing. You can see the backhoe we used as
an elevated platform at the far right.  </i> </div> </center>

After gluing the rigid foam to the 4x8 plywood, screwing the sheathing in was
pretty simple -- I used some plymetal screws to fasten the 4x8 sheets to the
metal studs. They have a little winged head that drills a slightly larger hole
through the wood so it doesn't ride up on you when you begin drilling into the
metal. It took anywhere from 5 seconds to a minute to put a screw in, depending
on how much force I was able to apply in the physical position I was in.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/rear-right.jpg" alt="Rear right
sheathing"> </center>

Since the design called for screws every 6" on the edges and every 12"
elsewhere, that tallied up to over 1000 screws! Needless to say, it took over
a week of two people working full-time to get it all installed.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/temp-support.jpg" alt="Temp
support"> </center>

If your studs aren't perfectly aligned to 48" boundaries, or if you're working
alone, it can be quite frustrating to get the 4x8 sheets fastened at precisely
the right spot. Any gaps would ooze out spray foam and be susceptible to water
penetration, so I wanted to get it as tight as possible. I used a few different
techniques to position the sheathing before fastening it in place.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/front-right.jpg" alt="front right
sheathing"> <div class="caption"> <i> A hydraulic jack is a precise instrument
for controlling the height of sheathing.  </i> </div> </center>

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/temp-support.jpg" alt="temp
support"> </center>

With all those long screws going through the stud, I had to be careful not to
penetrate a water line or electrical wire. In contrast, with wood studs you can
use nail plates to prevent this much more easily. I also found out if you left
foil-faced rigid foam stacked together for too long with moisture, the foil
begins to decay!

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/water-inlet.jpg" alt="water
inlet"> </center>

At the corners, I left it at a simple overlap since these will be covered up
later with 2x4 cedar trim.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/slight-warp.jpg" alt="slight
warp"> <div class="caption"> <i> The gap was fixed once the screws were in.
</i> </div> </center>

Underneath the trailer, I attached four 4x8 sheets of 1/8" aluminum to prevent
road debris from ending up in my living room. These also had to be layered with
rigid foam -- otherwise the bottom of my house would be one giant heatsink.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/underbelly.jpg" alt="underbelly
shielding"> <div class="caption"> <i> Six hours on my back under the trailer,
brushing metal shavings out of my face and hair was a thrilling adventure.
</i> </div> </center>

Once the "walls" were up, it really started to feel like a house. Now I had to
tow it to get insulated.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/kitchen-spraying.jpg" alt="Kitchen
sprayfoam"> </center>

It only took an hour or so with two guys working at it -- one spraying and the
other cleaning up the excess.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/wall-spraying.jpg" alt="Wall
sprayfoam"> </center>

I was lucky to find a variant of spray foam made from Soy oil, so it's
non-toxic (but still sticky as hell). Within 3 seconds of being applied, it
reaches 95% of its structural rigidity. And this stuff is rock-solid! If I'd
known how hard it becomes, I may have designed the frame to be a little
lighter.

<center> <img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/with-trailer.jpg" alt="With
trailer"> </center>

While I had my house out on the road, I decided to make a quick stop at the
scale. With sheathing, insulation, and framing done, I weighed in at about
5,000 lbs! Heavy, but not too bad considering my 14,000 lb limit.

Next is building the front tongue shed!


Here are all the pics:

<ul class="thumbnails">
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/bathroom.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/bathroom.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/dad.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/dad.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/front-right.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/front-right.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/front.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/front.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/kitchen-sheathing.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/kitchen-sheathing.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/kitchen-spraying.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/kitchen-spraying.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/panorama.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/panorama.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/radiant-floor-lines.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/radiant-floor-lines.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/radiant-floor.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/radiant-floor.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/rear-right.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/rear-right.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/side-wall.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/side-wall.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/slight-warp.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/slight-warp.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/spraying-finished.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/spraying-finished.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/spraying-overview.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/spraying-overview.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/temp-support.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/temp-support.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/underbelly.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/underbelly.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/wall-spraying.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/wall-spraying.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/water-inlet.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/water-inlet.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/with-trailer.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/with-trailer.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
<li><a href="/img/sheathing-insulation/without-trailer.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation"><img src="/img/sheathing-insulation/without-trailer.jpg" data-lightbox="sheathing-insulation" ></a></li>
</ul>

